 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  1 This text was adapted by The Saylor Foundation under a Creative 
Commons Attribution- NonCommercial -ShareAlike 3.0 License  without 
attribution as requested by the work’s original creator or licensee.  
 
   
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  27 Chapter 3  
Demand and Pricing  
 
Decisions related to demand and pricing are usually called marketing decisions. Marketing is an 
established profession and an applied academic discipline with a large body of literature. 
However, economic reasoning and concepts provide much of the theoretical foundation for 
marketing practice. In this chapter, we will address these elements from the perspective of 
economics.  
 
 
3.1 Theory of the Consumer  
Back in Chapter 2 "Key Measures and Relationships" , we used a demand curve to represent the 
relationship between the price charged for ice cream bars and the maximum number of ice 
cream bars that customers would purchase. We will address how to create a demand curve later 
in this chapter, but we will begin our discussion with a brief review of microeconomic theory 
that endeavors to explain how consumers behave.  
A consumer is someone who makes consumption decisions for herself or for her household unit. 
In a modern society, c onsumption is largely facilitated by purchases for goods and services. 
Some of these goods and services are essential to a consumer’s livelihood, but others are 
discretionary, perhaps even a luxury. Consumers are limited in how much they can consume by 
their wealth. A consumer’s wealth will change over time due to income and expenditures. She 
might be able to borrow against future income so as to increase her capacity to purchase now in 
exchange for diminished wealth and consumption later. Similarly, she may retain some of her 
current wealth as savings toward increased future consumption. Consumption decisions may be 
planned into the future, taking account of the expected changes in wealth over time.  
The theory  of the consumer  posits that a consumer plans he r purchases, the timing of those 
purchases, and borrowing and saving so as maximize the satisfaction she and her household unit 
will experience from consumption of goods and services. In this theory, consumers are able to 
compare any two patterns of consum ption, borrowing, and saving and deem that either one is 
preferred to the second or they are indifferent between the two patterns. Based on the ability to  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  28 do these comparisons, consumers look at the prices charged for various services now, and what 
they expect prices to be for goods and services in the future, and select the pattern of 
consumption, borrowing, and saving that generates the greatest satisfaction over their lifetime 
within the constraint of their wealth and expected future income.  
Although the  consumers may anticipate changes in prices over time, they may find that their 
guesses about future prices are incorrect. When this happens, the theory states that they will 
adjust their consumption, borrowing, and saving to restore the optimality under the newly 
revealed prices. In fact, the theory identifies two effects of price changes: the substitution effect 
and the income effect.  
The substitution effect is based on an argument employing marginal reasoning like the marginal 
analysis discussed in  Chapter 2 "Key Measures and Relationships" . Economists often use the 
term  utility  as a hypothetical quantitative value for satisfaction that a consumer receives from a 
pattern of consumption. If a consumer were to receive one more unit of some good or serv ice, 
the resulting increase in their utility is called the  marginal  utility  of the good . As a consequence 
of maximizing their overall satisfaction from consumption, or equivalently maximizing their 
utility, it will be the case that if you take the marginal  utility of one good or service and divide it 
by its price, you should get the same ratio for any other good or service. If they were not roughly 
equal, the consumer would be able to swap consumption of one good or service for another, 
keep within their wealth constraint, and have higher utility. The substitution  effect  is the 
consumer’s response to a changing price to restore balance in the ratios of marginal utility to 
price.  
Just as a simple illustration, suppose a consumer likes bananas and peaches as a treat. For the 
sake of the illustration, let’s suppose an additional banana has a marginal utility of 2 and a 
peach has a marginal utility of 3. If a banana costs $0.20 and a peach costs $0.30, bananas and 
peaches have a ratio of the marginal utility to its price equal to 10. If the peach price increases to 
$0.40, the ratio will become lower for peaches and the consumer may substitute some 
purchases of peaches with purchases of more bananas.  
As the result of price changes and substitution, the consumer’s overall utility may increase or 
decrease. Consequently, the consumer may experience the equivalent of an increase or decrease  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  29 in wealth, in the sense that it would have required a different level of wealth to just barely afford 
the new consumption pattern un der the previous set of prices. This equivalent change in 
purchasing power is called the  income  effect . 
Economists have precise techniques for separating the response to a price change into a 
substitution effect and an income effect.  [1] This is beyond the  scope of this text. For our 
purposes, it is sufficient to appreciate that price changes will affect the mix of goods and services 
that is best and change the consumer’s overall level of satisfaction.  
In most cases, the primary response to a price change i s a substitution effect, with a relatively 
modest income effect. However, for goods and services that a consumer cannot substitute easily, 
a sizeable price change may have a significant income effect. For example, when gasoline prices 
jumped dramatically i n the United States, consumers may have reduced their driving somewhat 
but were unable to find a substitute for the essential needs served by driving their cars. As a 
result, consumers experienced a dramatic drop in wealth available for other goods and services 
and consumed generally less of all of those to compensate for the greater expenditure on 
gasoline.  
Normally, price increases result in less consumption of the associated good or service, whereas 
price decreases results in more consumption. This typic al pattern is usually supported by both 
the substitution effect and the income effect. An interesting exception is the case 
of Giffen  goods , which is a situation where consumption of a good or service may increase in 
response to a price increase or decrease in response to a price decrease. This anomaly is 
explained by a strong income effect. An economist named Robert Giffen discovered that Irish 
consumers increased the use of potatoes in their diet during the Irish Potato Famine of the 
1840s, even though th e price of potatoes rose dramatically. Basically, because potatoes were a 
staple of the Irish diet, when the potato price increased, the wealth available to purchase other 
food items diminished and Irish consumers wanted to purchase more potatoes to compen sate 
for the diminished purchases of other food items.  
 
 
[1] See Varian  (1993)  for a discussion  of the substitution  effect,  income  effect,  and Giffen  goods.  
  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  30 3.2 Is the Theory of the Consumer Realistic?  
Strictly speaking, it would be difficult to make a case that the theory of the consumer conforms 
to our own experience of consumption decisions or what we observe of other consumers. We 
don’t consciously weigh the relative marginal utilities of tens of thousands of possible goods and 
services we might consume. We don’t know all the current prices and don’t even know of the 
existence of many goods and services. Even if we did, the computational complexity to solve for 
optimal consumption would overwhelm our faculties, and probably even the fastest computers 
available.  
Many times we and others don’t think of our consumption in terms of what gives us the greatest 
satisfaction but in terms of what it takes to get by. Consumers who are impoverished or suffer a 
major ailment are probably unable to do even a modest  attempt at optimizing consumption. 
Others may simply consume as a matter of habit rather than conscious choice.  
Although our consumption decisions may not fully conform to the theory of the consumer, there 
have been some attempts to argue that we do appro ximate it. Herbert Simon proposed a theory 
of bounded  rationality  [1] that states that humans do behave rationally with a limited range of 
options. So if consumers focus on a modest set of important goods and services, they may be 
able to achieve something  close to the theoretical optimum in terms of overall utility. Simon also 
observed that human beings may not optimize so much as they “ satisfice ,” meaning that they 
work to meet a certain level of consumption satisfaction rather than the very best pattern of 
consumption. If the level of acceptability is reasonably close to the optimum level, again the 
results of consumption decisions may approximate what would occur if the consumers operated 
according to this theory.  
Another argument suggesting that differe nces between the theory and actual behavior may not 
result in starkly different consumption is that we observe how others behave. If someone else, 
either by active choice or by accidental discovery, is experiencing greater satisfaction under 
similar circum stances of wealth and income, their friends and neighbors will detect it and start 
to emulate their consumption patterns. So our consumption may evolve in the direction of the 
optimal pattern.   
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  31 Perhaps most importantly, the lack of face validity of the theo ry of the consumer does mean the 
theory is not useful in modeling consumer behavior. We do expect consumers to respond to 
price changes and we do expect consumers to respond to changes in their wealth, whether due to 
changes in their actual discretionary i ncome or indirect impacts on wealth resulting from price 
changes.  
 
[1] Bounded  rationality  and satisficing  are discussed  in Simon (1997).  
 
3.3 Determinants of Demand  
We can approach the challenge of modeling consumer behavior in a more practical manner that 
is informed by the theory of the consumer. To estimate demand and study the nature of 
consumer demand, we start by identifying a set of key factors that have a stro ng influence on 
consumer demand.  
Probably the most important influencing factor is one we considered for the ice cream business 
in Chapter 2 "Key Measures and Relationships" —the price of the item itself. Price is also the key 
determinant of demand in the t heory of the consumer. In the simplest cases, there is a single 
price that applies to any item or unit of service being sold. However, as we will discuss later in 
the section on price discrimination, prices may vary depending on who is buying it and how 
much they are buying.  
Businesses incur promotional costs to boost the consumption of their products. Promotion can 
be in the form of advertising, free samples, appearance in business directories, and so on. The 
theory of the consumer provides a supporting rationale for expenditure on promotion: If a 
consumer is regarded as deciding how to allocate his wealth across available goods and services, 
in order for your product to be included as a candidate in that choice, the consumer has to be 
aware that your pro duct or service exists. However, as we will discuss in  Chapter 7 "Firm 
Competition and Market Structure" , large firms often engage in promotion at expenditure levels 
well beyond what is needed to make your firm and product known to the consumer, as a tacti c of 
competition.   
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  32 Consumer demand may vary depending on where and when the consumption is occurring. 
Being able to quantitatively assess how consumption changes by location or time is a powerful 
tool in deciding where and when to sell your product. Some bu sinesses decide to serve broad 
geographical regions; others target specific locations. Some businesses sell most or all times of 
the day and days of the year; others limit their operations to a restricted number of hours or 
periods within a year. What stra tegy will work best will depend on the product and the 
company’s overall marketing strategy.  
Businesses have a choice of channels for selling. They can operate their own commercial 
establishments or sell wholesale to other retailers. Goods can be sold dire ctly at a retail site or 
via the Internet, telephone, or mail order. Understanding how the channels used will affect 
demand is important.  
The selection of price, promotional activities, location, and channel are generally in the control 
of the business con cern. In texts on marketing strategy,  [1] the composition of these decisions is 
called a  marketing  mix. For a marketing mix to be effective, the different elements need to be 
consistent.  
However, there are other important determinants of consumption for a good or service that are 
largely out of the control of the providing firm. We will next consider some of these 
determinants.  
As suggested by the substitution effect in the theory of the consumer, the consumer is able to 
alter his pattern of consumption to meet his needs as prices and wealth levels change. The most 
significant swaps are likely to be between goods and services that come close to meeting the 
same consumer need. For example, a banana can serve as a substitute for a peach in meeting the 
need for  a piece of fruit. Usually the items that act as substitutes to the product of one firm will 
be sold by a different firm. Consequently, how that other firm elects to price, promote, locate, 
and channel its goods or services will have an impact on the consu mption of substitutable goods 
or services sold by the first firm.  
Different goods and services can be strongly related in another way called a complementary 
relationship. Consumption of some goods and services can necessitate greater consumption of 
other g oods and services. For example, if more automobiles are sold, there will be increased  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  33 demand for tires, oil, repair services, automobile financing, automobile insurance, and so on. 
Correctly monitoring and forecasting the demand of key complements can impr ove the ability of 
a firm to forecast its own consumer demand.  
Most firms sell multiple products and services that are related. Within this collection, there are 
probably important substitute and complementary relationships. A car dealer that sells several  
models of vehicles has substitutable products that compete with each other. The car dealer may 
be offering services like repair service and financing that are complementary to vehicle sales. In 
situations with strong substitute and complementary product relationships, the firm needs to 
consider these in its demand forecasting and market strategy.  
Earlier, we discussed the income effect caused by price changes and indicated that this is caused 
by the consumer realizing an increase or decrease in overall purchasing wealth. Probably a more 
significant cause of changes in wealth occurs from fluctuations in the economic activity, which 
will affect the demand for most goods and services. The relationship between demand quantities 
and economic indicators of econom ic activity or disposable income can improve business 
forecasting considerably.  
Demand is also affected by the demographics of the population of eligible customers. How many 
people live in a region, their ethnic and socioeconomic composition, and age distr ibution can 
explain variations in demand across regions and the ability to forecast in the future as these 
demographics change.  
 
[1] Kotler  and Armstrong  (2010)  is a popular  text on marketing  principles.  
 
3.4 Modeling Consumer Demand  
To develop a formal model of consumer demand, the first step is to identify the most important 
determinants of demand and define variables that measure those determinants. Ideally, we 
should use variables for which data exist so that statistical estimation  techniques can be applied 
to develop an algebraic relationship between the units of a good consumed and the values of the 
key determinants. Techniques to derive these algebraic relationships from historical data are  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  34 outside the scope of this text, but an interested reader may want to consult a text on 
econometrics.  [1] 
We will examine a simple example of a model of consumer demand. Suppose a business is 
selling broadband services in a community. The managers of the business have identified four 
key determinants of demand: (a) the price they charge for the service, (b) their advertising 
expenditure, (c) the price charged by the competition, and (d) the disposable income of their 
potential customers. They define four variables to measure these determin ants:  
P = the price per month of their service, in dollars,A = advertising expenditure per month, in 
dollars,CP = the price per month of the competitor’s service, in dollars,DIPC = the disposable 
income per capita, in dollars, as measured by the U.S. Depar tment of Commerce for that 
month.  
Using past data, they estimate the following equation to relate these variables to number of 
broadband subscribers to their service during a month, symbolized by Q:  
Q = 25,800 − 800 P + 4 A + 200 CP + 0.4 DIPC.  
This relati onship is called a demand  function . 
One application of the demand function is to estimate the consumption quantity Q for specific 
values of P, CP, and DIPC. Suppose P = $30, A = $5000, CP = $25, and DIPC = $33,000:  
Q = 25,800 − 800(30) + 4(5000) + 200(25) + 0.4(33,000) = 40,000 subscribers  
In Chapter 2 "Key Measures and Relationships" , we introduced a demand curve to describe the 
relationship between the quantity of items sold and the price of the item. When there are 
multiple determinants of demand, the demand curve can be interpreted as a reduced view of the 
demand function where only the price of the product is allowed to vary. Any other variables are 
assumed to remain at a fixed level. For the previous demand function for broadband service, 
suppose we assume A is fixed at $5000, CP is fixed at $25, and DIPC is fixed at $33,000. If you 
substitute these values into the demand function and aggregate constant terms, the demand 
function becomes  
Q = 64,000 − 800 P.  
Recall that demand curves are usually expres sed with price as a function of quantity. With some 
basic algebra the equation of the demand curve can be written as  
P = $80 − $0.00125 Q.   
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  35 What happens to the demand curve if one of the other variables is a different value? Well, in 
short, the demand curve  would shift. Suppose the competitor decides to increase its price to 
$35. Repeating the preceding steps, the demand function simplifies to  
Q = 66,000 − 800 P  
or, expressed with P as a function of Q,  
P = $82.50 − 0.00125 Q.  
Figure 3.1 "Shift in Demand Curv e for Broadband Service Caused by Increase of Competitor 
Price From $25/month to $35/month"  shows a graph of the demand curve before and after the 
shift. Effectively, the result is that the broadband firm would see its demand increase by 2000 
customers per  month, or alternatively, the firm could raise its price to $32.50 and still maintain 
40,000 customers per month.  
 
[1] Stock  and Watson  (2007)  is an established  econometrics  text.  
 
3.5 Forecasting Demand  
Identifying the key determinants of demand and developing demand functions gives a business 
manager a better understanding of his customers. A benefit of that understanding is an 
improved accuracy in forecasting the demand levels for their products and services in an 
upcoming period. Most businesses ne ed to plan production activities well in advance of when 
the goods and services are actually provided to the consumer. Businesses need to have an 
adequately sized operation, have a sufficient staff in terms of size and training, and obtain any 
necessary re sources for production. These capabilities are usually not possible to achieve 
overnight. For some goods, production is a process that takes significant time from initiation to 
completion, such as constructing apartments or office space that will be leased  to customers. 
Even businesses that provide products or services “made to order,” where most of the direct 
organization or production activities occur after a purchase is made, usually need to have 
supplies, trained labor, and management structures in plac e in advance of the order to be in a 
position to negotiate a sale.  
Figure 3.1  Shift in Demand Curve for Broadband Service Caused by Increase of Competitor 
Price From $25/month to $35/month   
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  36  
 
Without some concrete estimate of what level of demand will result after these planning, 
designing, and production activities, a business may find itself with an excess of unused capacity 
or unable to serve the demand that follows. Excess capability is cos tly because idle resources 
have an opportunity cost but do not contribute to sales or revenue, especially when the unused 
resources spoil and cannot be used at a later time. When businesses set production targets too 
low, they discover missed opportunities  for profit and unmet demand that is likely to discourage 
those consumers from being customers in the future.  
To a limited extent, a business may be able to alter future demand to be more in line with its 
capacity because it has control over some determina nts of demand, like pricing, promotion, and 
 
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  37 location. If the business is surprised by demand levels that are higher or lower than expected, 
these market strategy elements can be adjusted to either stimulate or diminish demand to 
conform to its production c apabilities. Still, the financial performance of an enterprise is 
improved when the demand is consistent with the levels anticipated in the initial planning 
stages.  
Further, most businesses are not in control of all the key determinants of demand. The busi ness 
cannot control the direction of the overall economy and consumer incomes. The business may 
be able to guess at, but not control, actions by other companies that sell substitute and 
complementary goods and services. Anticipating the impact of these out side forces is critical.  
Businesses can improve demand forecasting with their demand functions using the future values 
of determinant variables in those demand functions. Forecasts for widely followed economic 
indicators like disposable income are availabl e from public releases or private forecasting 
services. If the business has a record of data for these uncontrollable variables, they can apply 
quantitative forecasting techniques like time series analysis or develop casual models that relate 
these factors  to other variables that can be forecast. Readers are encouraged to look at a text in 
business forecasting for assistance in doing quantitative forecasts.  [1] 
For variables where past patterns may not continue into the future, like competitor actions on 
pricing and promotion or unexpected climate events, a business can construct scenarios in 
which management postulates settings for these factors and then develops a demand forecast for 
each scenario. Although the future will almost certainly not conform exac tly to any single 
scenario, the exercise prepares them to monitor for changes in these factors and be ready to 
make a prompt response whenever a similar scenario emerges.  
 
[1] One business  forecasting  text is a book  authored  by Hanke  and Wichern  (2009).  
 
3.6 Elasticity of Demand  
Another use of a mathematical demand function is measuring how sensitive demand is to 
changes in the level of one of the determinants. Suppose we would like to assess whether the 
demand for broadband service will change much in res ponse to a change in its price. One  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  38 indicator of the level of response to a price change is the coefficient of the price term in the 
demand function equation, – 800 P. The interpretation of the coefficient – 800 is that for each 
increase of $1 in the monthly  subscriber price, the number of monthly subscribers will decrease 
by 800 subscribers.  
This observation provides some insight, particularly if the broadband firm is considering a price 
change and would like to know the impact on the number of subscribers. However, for someone 
who measures price in terms of a different currency, say Japanese yen, a conversion to U.S. 
dollars would be needed to appreciate whether the demand change implied by the coefficient 
value is large or modest. Another limitation of this approach to measuring the responsiveness of 
demand to a determinant of demand is that the observation may not apply readily to other 
communities that may have a larger or smaller population of potential customers.  
An alternative approach to measuring the sensitivity of demand to its determinant factors is to 
assess the ratio of percentage change in demand to the percentage change in its determinant 
factor. This type of measurement is called an elasticity  of demand . 
Assessing the elasticity of demand relative to changes in the price of the good or service being 
consumed is called the  own -price elasticity  or usually just the price  elasticity . As an illustration 
of this, suppose we want to measure the sensitivity of demand for broadband services 
corresponding to  a modest change in its price. First, to determine the price elasticity, you need 
to clearly understand the settings for all the determinant factors because elasticity changes if 
you look at a different configuration of factor levels. Suppose we decide to find the price 
elasticity when P = $30, A = $5000, CP = $25, and DIPC = $33,000. Earlier we determined that 
the demand quantity at this setting was Q = 40,000 monthly subscribers.  
If we let the price increase by 10% from $30 to $33 and repeat the calculati on of Q in the 
demand function, the value of Q will decline to 37,600 subscribers, which is a decline of 2400 
customers. As a percentage of 40,000 monthly customers, this would be a 6% decrease. So the 
price elasticity here would be  
Price elasticity = – 6%/10% = – 0.6.  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  39 Since the law of demand states that quantity demanded will drop when its price increases and 
quantity demanded will increase when its price decreases, price elasticities are usually negative 
numbers (other than special cases like Giffen goods, described earlier in this chapter).  
Goods and services are categorized as being  price  elastic  whenever the price elasticity is more 
negative than – 1. In this category, the percentage change in quantity will be greater than the 
percentage change in price if  you ignore the negative sign.  
When the computed price elasticity is between 0 and – 1, the good or service is considered to 
be price  inelastic . This does not mean that demand does not respond to changes in price, but 
only that the response on a percentage basis is lower than the percentage change in price when 
the negative sign is ignored.  
In those rare instances where price elasticities are positive, the product violates the law of 
demand. Again, these are similar to the Giffen goods discussed earlier.  
By assessing sensitivity to changes on a percentage basis, it does not matter what units are used 
in the variable measurements. We could have constructed our demand function with a price 
measurement in cents or euros, and the price elasticity would have been the same. Also, if we 
wanted to compare the price elasticity of broadband service in this community with the price 
elasticity of broadband service in a larger community, we could compare the price elasticities 
directly without any need for further adjustme nt. 
Another important class of elasticities is the response of demand to changes in income, or 
the income  elasticity . For our broadband example, if we were to calculate the income elasticity at 
the same point where we calculated the price elasticity, we wo uld have found an elasticity of 
0.33. The interpretation of this value is as follows: For an increase of 1% in income levels, 
demand for broadband will increase by 0.33%.  
When income elasticity of a product is greater than one, we call the product a cyclic  good . The 
adjective “cyclic” suggests that this demand is sensitive to changes in the business cycle and will 
generally change more on a percentage basis than income levels. Luxury goods that customers 
can do without in hard economic times often fall in th is category.  
When income elasticity is between zero and one, we call the product a noncyclic  good . Our 
broadband service falls in this category. The demand for noncyclic goods tends to move up and  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  40 down with income levels, but not as strongly on a percentage  basis. Most of the staple goods and 
services we need are noncyclic.  
Normally we would expect demand for a good or service to increase when incomes increase and 
decrease when incomes decrease, other things being equal. However, there are arguably some 
exceptions that do not behave this way. Low -cost liquor, which might see increased use in hard 
economic times, is one of these possible exceptions. When income elasticity is negative, we call 
the product a countercyclic good . 
When elasticities are calculated to  measure the response of demand to price changes for a 
different good or service, say either a substitute product or complementary product, we call the 
calculated value a cross- price  elasticity . Cross- price elasticities tend to be positive for substitute 
goods and negative for complementary goods. In our example, the competitor’s service is a 
substitute good. If we calculate the cross- price elasticity for changes in the competitor’s price on 
demand for broadband service at the point examined earlier, the result is 0.125.  
Elasticities can be calculated for any factor on demand that can be expressed quantitatively. In 
our example, we could also calculate an advertising elasticity, which has a value of 0.5 at the 
given settings for the four factors in our deman d function. This value indicates that an increase 
of 1% in our monthly advertising will result in a 0.5% increase in subscribers.  
In interpreting and comparing elasticities, it is important to be clear whether the elasticity 
applies to a single business in  a market or to all sellers in a market. Some elasticities, like price 
elasticities and advertising elasticities, tend to reflect greater sensitivity to changes in the factor 
when an elasticity is calculated for a single business than when assessed for the  total demand for 
all sellers in a market. For example, we noted earlier that consumers will be unable to decrease 
gasoline consumption much, at least immediately, even if gasoline prices climb dramatically. 
This implies that gasoline is very price inelastic. However, this observation really applies to the 
gasoline industry as a whole. Suppose there was a street intersection in a city that has a gasoline 
station on every corner selling effectively the same product at about the same price, until one 
station increases its price dramatically (believing gasoline was highly inelastic to changes in 
price, so why not), but the other three stations leave their price where it was. If prices were 
clearly displayed, most customers would avoid the station that tried to increase the price and  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  41 that station would see nearly all of its business disappear. In this situation where the 
competitors’ goods are highly substitutable, the price elasticity for a single gasoline station 
would be very price elastic.  
 
 
3.7 Consumption Decisions in the Short Run and the 
Long Run  
The main reason most consumers are unable to respond very quickly to an increase in gasoline 
prices is because there is not an effective substitute for automobile travel. However, if 
consumers were convinced that gasoline prices were going to continue to rise into the 
foreseeable future, they would gradually make changes to their lifestyles so that they are able to 
reduce gasoline consumption significantly. They could purchase more fuel -efficient cars or cars 
that use an alternative fuel, or they could change jobs or change residences so that they are 
closer to their places of employment, shopping, and such.  
Economists distinguish short- run decisions from long -run decisions. A consumer decision is 
considered  short  run when her consumption will occur soon enough to be constrained by 
existing household assets, personal commitments, and know -how. Given sufficient time to 
remove these constraints, the consumer can change her consumption patterns and make 
additional impr ovements in the utility of consumption. Decisions affecting consumption far 
enough into the future so that any such adjustments can be made are called  long -run decisions.  
Demand functions and demand curves can be developed for short -run or long -run time 
horizons. Short -run demand curves are easier to develop because they estimate demand in the 
near future and generally do not require a long history of data on consumption and its 
determinant factors. Because long -run demand must account for changes in consum ption styles, 
it requires longer histories of data and greater sophistication.  
Elasticities of demand in the short run can differ substantially from elasticities in the long run. 
Long -run price elasticities for a product are generally of higher magnitude than their short -run 
counterparts because the consumer has sufficient time to change consumption styles.  
There is so much uncertainty about long -run consumption that these analyses are usually 
limited to academic and government research. Short- run analyses,  on the other hand, are  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  42 feasible for many analysts working for the businesses that must estimate demand in order to 
make production decisions.  
 
 
3.8 Price Discrimination  
In the ice cream bar summer business in  Chapter 2 "Key Measures and Relationships" , we 
presumed that the student operators would decide on a price to charge. All ice cream bars would 
be sold at that price. We reasoned that more ice cream bars could be sold as the price is 
decreased. If the students decide to charge $1.50 per ice cream bar, a potential customer will 
decide if the utility of the ice cream bar is sufficiently high for them to be willing to give up $1.50 
of their wealth. If not, they will walk away without making a purchase. If the students instead 
decide to charge $1.80 per ice  cream bar, the demand curve indicated that 6000 fewer unit 
purchases would occur, meaning 6000 of those purchases were not worth $1.80 to the 
purchasers. However, some of the customers would have been willing to pay over $2.00, and 
fewer even more than $2.50 or $3.00.  
When all consumers pay the same price, some of them get a kind of surplus because they would 
have been willing to pay more for the ice cream bar. Sellers may wish they were able to charge 
customers the maximum amount they are willing to pay, which would result in more revenue 
and no added cost. In economics, the term for charging different prices to different customers is 
called  price  discrimination . Economists have actually defined multiple types of price 
discrimination, called first -degree p rice discrimination, second -degree price discrimination, and 
third -degree price discrimination.  
First- degree price  discrimination  is an attempt by the seller to leave the price unannounced in 
advance and charge each customer the highest price they would be  willing to pay for the 
purchase. If perfectly executed, this would meet the ideal of getting the greatest revenue possible 
from sales. Unfortunately, anything close to perfect execution of first- degree price 
discrimination is unrealistic because customers  have an incentive to not reveal how much they 
would be willing to pay and instead try to pay as little as possible. Attempts to sell using first-
degree price discrimination may be illegal as well, as it may be deemed discriminatory in the 
legal sense of t he word.   
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  43 Some commercial dealings resemble attempts at first- degree price discrimination. Sometimes 
there is no set price, and the buyer and seller negotiate a price. This is the customary way that 
automobiles have been sold in the United States. The proce ss may start with a preannounced 
price, but one that is usually higher than the seller actually expects to receive. This falls short of 
pure first- degree discrimination because the buyer is probably able to negotiate down from the 
most he would pay, possib ly quite a bit if the buyer is a good negotiator. In addition, there is 
time and effort expended in the negotiating, which is a kind of cost to the transaction that the 
buyer may see as part of the purchase cost and the seller may see as an added cost of b usiness.  
Goods and services are sometimes sold or purchased via an auction. This is usually an effective 
means when the seller has a limited number of items to sell. Run properly, an auction will 
distinguish those willing to pay more, although it probably will not manage to get a bid as high 
as the maximum the buyer would have paid. Again, the cost of operating an auction is expensive 
in comparison to selling using a set, preannounced price.  
Businesses that sell a product that is in demand with no good substitute available will 
sometimes employ a sliding price, where they begin selling at a very high price that is attractive 
to relatively few consumers. After a time when presumably those high -value customers make 
their purchases, the business will drop the p rice somewhat and attract purchases from another 
group that was willing pay slightly less than the first group. Successive price drops can continue 
until it would be unprofitable for the seller to drop the price any lower. Sliding prices are 
sometimes used  with products that employ new technologies, when the initial seller has the 
market to itself, at least for a while, and offers a got- to-have item for some customers. Of course, 
although these eager customers may be willing to pay more, they may be aware o f this pricing 
strategy and delay their purchase, so this approach will not extract the full value customers 
would have been willing to pay.  
When goods and services are sold according to a preannounced price, the customary 
arrangement is that the charge fo r multiple items is the price times the number of items. This is 
called  linear  pricing . However, customers differ in the volume they are interested in purchasing. 
A business may benefit by offering different prices to those who purchase in larger volumes 
because either they can increase their profit with the increased volume sales or their costs per  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  44 unit decrease when items are purchased in volume. Businesses can create alternative pricing 
methods that distinguish high -volume buyers from low -volume buyers. This is  second -
degree price  discrimination . 
A donut shop might offer a free donut to anyone who purchases a whole dozen because the 
purchase requires less clerk time per donut sold and increases how many donuts get purchased. 
However, since only those who buy at least a dozen donuts get a free donut, the discount is 
limited to those people and not the customer who purchases just a donut or two. This would be 
second -degree price discrimination.  
Another nonlinear pricing scheme to employ second -degree discrim ination is a two -part price. A 
customer pays a flat charge to be a customer and then pays a per unit charge based on how 
much they consume. Some services like telephone service are primarily fixed cost and have a 
very small per unit variable cost. By charg ing telephone customers a flat monthly fee and low 
per unit charge, they encourage more use of the service than if they simply charged a linear price 
per unit and see more revenue in relation to costs. Membership stores that require customers to 
pay an ent ry fee before being allowed to shop, but offer lower prices than regular stores for 
purchased items, is another example of a two -part pricing.  
Third -degree price  discrimination  is differential pricing to different groups of customers. One 
justification  for this practice is that producing goods and services for sale to one identifiable 
group of customers is less than the cost of sales to another group of customers. For example, a 
publisher of music or books may be able to sell a music album or a book in electronic form for 
less cost than a physical form like a compact disc or printed text.  
A second justification for charging different prices to different groups of customers is that one 
group may be more sensitive to price than the other group. Earlier we discussed elasticity of 
demand. If we separated the demand for the two groups into separate demand curves, at any 
given price the more price sensitive group will have stronger negative price elasticity. Sellers are 
able to increase economic profit by charg ing a lower price to the price -elastic group and a higher 
price to the more price- inelastic group. As an example, 25 years ago music was sold in two 
formats: cassette tapes and compact discs. The production cost of a cassette tape was roughly 
equivalent to  a compact disc, but music on compact discs often retailed at a higher price because  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  45 it was perceived that customers of compact discs were more demanding of quality and more 
price inelastic.  
To apply third -degree price discrimination, the seller must be ab le to clearly identify and sort 
the customer by a salient characteristic. For example, a cable provider may be aware that 
existing subscribers are price inelastic relative to other households that are not existing 
customers. The cable provider will typical ly charge reduced rates to attract new customers and is 
able to execute the price discrimination because it knows whether a customer is an existing 
customer or not. A sports clothing retailer may know that fans of a team are more price inelastic 
in the pur chase of apparel displaying the name or mascot of that team than customers who are 
not fans. However, if the clothing retailer were to attempt to charge differential prices, the 
customers who are fans would have the incentive to disguise that characteristi c, so third -degree 
price discrimination would not work well in this case.  
 
  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  153 Chapter 9  
References  
 
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: Quality, uncertainty, and the market 
mechanism.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3), 488– 500.  
 
Arrow, K. J. (1962). The economic implications of learning by doing. Review of Economic 
Studies 29 (3), 155– 173. 
 
Baumol , W. J., Panzar, J. C., & Willig, R. J. (1982). Contestable markets and the theory of 
industry structure . San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  
 
Baye, M. R. (2010).  Microeconomics and business strategy . New York, NY: McGraw -Hill Irwin.  
Boston Consultin g Group. (1970).  The product portfolio. Retrieved December 13, 2010, 
from  http://www.bcg.com/documents/file13255.pdf . 
 
Brandenburger, A. M., & Nalebuff, B. J. (1996). Co-opetition . New York, NY: Currency 
Doubleday.  
 
Brickley, J. A., Smith, C. W., Jr., & Zimmerman, J. L. (2001). Managerial economics and 
organizational architecture . New York, NY: McGraw- Hill Irwin.  
 
Brigham, E. F., & Ehrhardt, M. C. (2010). Financial management: Theor y and practice  (13th 
ed.). Mason, OH: South -Western Cengage Learning.  
 
Brock, J. W. (2009). The structure of American industry  (12th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall.  
 
Coase, R. H. (1937). The nature of the firm.  Economica 4 (16), 386 –405.  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  154  
Coase, R. H. (1960). The problem of social cost. The Journal of Law and Economics 3 , 1–44. 
 
Hanke, J. E., & Wichern, D. W. (2009). Business forecasting  (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall.  
 
Hirschey, M., & Pappas, J. L. (1996). Mana gerial economics  (8th ed.). Fort Worth, TX: The 
Dryden Press.  
 
Horngren, C. T. (1972).  Cost accounting: A managerial emphasis  (3rd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.  
 
Kotler, P., & Armstrong, G. (2010). Principles of marketing  (13th ed.). Upper Sad dle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall.  
Kreps, D. M. (2004).  Microeconomics for managers . New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.  
 
Milgrom, P. R., & Roberts, J. (1992). Economics, organization & management . Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
 
Mishan, E. J. (1976).  Cost -benefit analysis . New York, NY: Praeger.  
 
Porter, M. E. (1980). Competitive strategy . New York, NY: The Free Press.  
 
Samuelson, W. F., & Marks, S. G. (2010). Managerial economics  (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons.  
 
Shapiro, C., & Varian, H. R. (1999). Information rules . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press.  
  
Saylor URL: http://www.saylor.org/books   Saylor.org  
  155 Shugart, W. F., II, Chappell, W. F., & Cottle, R. L. (1994). Modern managerial economics: 
Economic theory for business decisions . Cincinnati, OH: South -Western Publishing Compa ny. 
 
Simon, H. A. (1997). Administrative behavior  (4th ed.). New York, NY: The Free Press.  
 
Smith, A. (1776).  The wealth of nations . New York, NY: Modern Library.  
 
Spence, A. M. (1974). Market signaling . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Stevenson, W. J. (1986). Production/operations management  (2nd ed.). Homewood, IL: Irwin.  
 
Stigler, G. J. (1971). The theory of economic regulation. Bell Journal of Economics and 
Management Science 2 (1), 3 –21. 
 
Stock, J. H., & Watson, M. W. (2007). Introduction to ec onometrics  (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: 
Addison -Wesley.  
U.S. Census Bureau. (2010).  Concentration ratios . Retrieved December 13, 2010, 
from http://www.census.gov/econ/concentration.html . 
 
Varian, H. A. (1993).  Intermediate microeconomics  (3rd ed.). New York, NY: W. W. Norton & 
Company.  
 
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource -based view of the firm.  Strategic Management Journal 5 (2), 
171–180.  
 
Womack, J. P., Jones, D. T., & Roos, D. (1990). The machine that changed the world . New York, 
NY: Rawson Associates Scribner.  
 